[PXCT-80] Nano Matter - Videos/Support Tutorials (#2303)
arduino/docs-content: content/hardware/03.nano/boards/nano-matter/tutorials/matter-fan/content.md

---

> title: 'Matter Smart Fan'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: 'Matter Smart Fan with the Arduino Nano Matter'
```

difficulty: beginner
compatible-products: [nano-matter]

> description: 'Learn how to build a Matter fan with speed control.'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: 'Learn how to build a Matter fan with speed control using the Arduino Nano Matter'
```

tags:
  - IoT
  - Matter
  - BLE
  - Fan
  - Motor
author: 'Christopher Méndez'
hardware:
  - hardware/03.nano/boards/nano-matter
software:
  - ide-v1
  - ide-v2
  - web-editor
  - iot-cloud
---

## Overview

> This tutorial will teach you how to create a Matter fan for keeping you cool. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial will teach you how to use the Arduino Nano Matter to create a Matter fan to keep you cool. 
```

![Matter fan overview](assets/thumbnail-v4.png)

> Thanks to the seamless compatibility of the Nano Matter with almost any Matter network we can easily integrate our fan with Amazon Alexa, Google Assistant, Apple Home, Home Assistant and even custom assistants.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thanks to the seamless compatibility of the Nano Matter with almost any Matter network we can easily integrate our fan with Amazon Alexa, Google Assistant, Apple Home, Home Assistant and even any professional custom solution.
```

We have prepared a short demo in video format in case you are a visual learner.

<iframe width="100%" height="480" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/AiFm4T9EfnA" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" allowfullscreen></iframe>

## Hardware and Software Requirements
### Hardware Requirements

> - [Nano Matter](https://store.arduino.cc/products/nano-matter) (x1)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Arduino Nano Matter](https://store.arduino.cc/products/nano-matter) (x1)
```

### Software Requirements

- [Arduino IDE 2.0+](https://www.arduino.cc/en/software) or [Arduino Cloud Editor](https://create.arduino.cc/editor)
- [Google Home App](https://home.google.com/get-app/)

### Download the Project Code

[![ ](assets/download.png)](assets/matter_fan.zip)

Download the complete project code [here](assets/matter_fan.zip).

### Board Core and Libraries

The **Silicon Labs** core contains the libraries and examples you need to work with the board's components, such as its Matter, Bluetooth® Low Energy, and I/Os. To install the Nano Matter core, navigate to **File > Preferences** and in the **Additional boards manager URLs**, add the following:

`https://siliconlabs.github.io/arduino/package_arduinosilabs_index.json`

Now navigate to **Tools > Board > Boards Manager** or click the Boards Manager icon in the left tab of the IDE. In the Boards Manager tab, search for `Nano Matter` and install the latest `Silicon Labs` core version.

![Installing the Silicon Labs core in the Arduino IDE](assets/bsp-install-2.png)

## Project Setup

### Schematic Diagram

Use the following connection diagram for the project:

![Project wiring diagram](assets/diagram-v4.png)

> 

Reviewer: add two lines explanation about the general connection or **the main thing the user must take attention**

      Serial.println("Fan ON");
    } else {
      Serial.println("Fan OFF");
    }
  }
}

void decommission_handler()
{
  // If the button is not pressed or the device is not commissioned - return
  if (digitalRead(BTN_BUILTIN) != LOW || !Matter.isDeviceCommissioned()) {
    return;
  }

  // Store the time when the button was first pressed
  uint32_t start_time = millis();
  // While the button is being pressed
  while (digitalRead(BTN_BUILTIN) == LOW) {
    // Calculate the elapsed time
    uint32_t elapsed_time = millis() - start_time;
    // If the button has been pressed for less than 10 seconds, continue
    if (elapsed_time < 10000u) {
      yield();
      continue;
    }

    // Blink the LED to indicate the start of the decommissioning process
    for (uint8_t i = 0u; i < 10u; i++) {
      digitalWrite(LED_BUILTIN, !(digitalRead(LED_BUILTIN)));
      delay(100);
    }

    Serial.println("Starting decommissioning process, device will reboot...");
    Serial.println();
    digitalWrite(LED_BUILTIN, LED_BUILTIN_INACTIVE);
    // This function will not return
    // The device will restart once decommissioning has finished
    Matter.decommission();
  }
}
```

> This is a very simple code that consist of the Arduino basic sketch parts:

Reviewer: improve the phrase, a little bit broken

- In the `setup()` function we initialize the Matter connectivity and the fan output pin. 
- In the `loop()` function we listen to any fan control command sent from the smartphone or voice assistant and then adjust the fan speed setting the PWM signal accordingly.

Once you uploaded the example code to the Nano Matter, open the Serial Monitor and reset the board.

![QR Code URL](assets/serial-monitor-v4.png)

> There you will find the URL that generates the QR for the Matter device commissioning.

Reviewer: there is not correct

```suggestion
After the reset you will find on the serial port the URL that generates the QR for the Matter device commissioning.
```

> ### Commissioning 

Reviewer: any way to improve this header? Device commissioning? we need a way to explain the less advanced users what is commissioning

Copy and paste the QR code URL on your favorite web browser and a unique QR code will be generated for your board.

Go to your **Google Home** app, navigate to **devices** and tap on **Add**, select the **Matter-enabled device** option and scan the QR code.

![Adding the device to Google Home app](assets/add-device.png)

![Your device is successfully added](assets/add-device-2.png)

## Final Results

Finally, you will be able to control the fan from your smartphone, hub or asking your personal assistant.

![Matter fan final result](assets/animation.gif)

## Conclusion

> In this tutorial we have learned how to create a Matter enabled fan that can be controlled from our smartphone and personal assistant. The Nano Matter allows us to seamlessly integrate the fan as a commercial product with our current smart home ecosystem.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this tutorial we have learned how to create a Matter enabled fan that can be controlled from our smartphone and personal assistant. The Nano Matter allows us to seamlessly integrate our own custom or old fan as a commercial product with our current smart home ecosystem.
```
